Now to query elements or nodes and I kind of use this term interchangeably, though I will come back
to the difference in a few seconds
but to query content let's say in your HTML page, I mean in your rendered HTML page
so in the DOM, you have a couple of methods which you can use on that document object
I showed you a few minutes ago,
most importantly you got query selector and get element by ID.
These methods will select one element at a time,
you also have query selector all and other methods like get elements by tag name which will select multiple
elements. So you can get access to single elements with query selector and get element by ID
and these are simply different ways of querying elements. Query selector takes a CSS selector as you could
use it in a CSS file, even pseudo selectors are supported and gives you therefore a lot of flexibility
and power when it comes to selecting elements with complex query in your DOM. Get element by ID on
the other hand takes an ID which you might have assigned to an HTML element and selects an element
by that and since ID should be unique on your web page,
this is a method which returns one element. The query selector method takes any CSS selector and
therefore this might be a selector that matches multiple elements but in this case, query selector, this
method will always give you access to the first matched element on the page,
so in the DOM.
So this gives you a direct reference to the DOM element which it found,
now query selector all, get elements by tag name and there are other methods as well which I'll show
you give you access to collections of elements, array-like objects,
typically a node list, though that also is not always the case but typically it's such a node list which
is not a real array but array-like, so which supports certain behaviors of an array but not all of them.
You have different ways of querying elements, you can for example use the above methods - query selector
all takes a CSS selector as query selector but unlike query selector, it does not return the first element
which it matched but all elements that match the selector. Get elements by tag name give you all the
elements that have a certain HTML tag and then there are other selectors to select by class name
or by the name attribute which you might have assigned, though the query selector all method is the most
flexible one where you have the power to select anything you want by CSS selectors.
Now one important difference here which I want I mention right away which often will not matter but
still is worth being mentioned is that query selector all will give you a non-live node list,
so a snapshot of the currently rendered DOM, whereas these get something by something methods like get elements
by tag name return a live node list which means that if you then add or remove elements which we'll
also learn throughout this module, you'll see that reflected in the list which you loaded through the get something
by something method, it will not be reflected in the data returned by query selector all but again, that's
something we can come back to later once we learned how to add and remove elements, for now let's ignore
that. Before we try these methods though and play around with them a bit to get a feeling for how you
select things, let's dive into nodes and elements. I kind of use these terms interchangeably but actually
should be careful and you should at least understand what the difference is.
So you have nodes and elements and nodes are the objects that make up the DOM, everything in the DOM
is a node. HTML tags are just element nodes as I mentioned, I will also refer to them as just elements
but in the end, these are element nodes to be super precise. We also have for example text nodes and there
are other nodes as well which aren't really that important though and which with you'll not really work.
Attached, you will find a thorough document about all supported nodes but text nodes and element nodes
are the important ones.
Now elements therefore are in the end just element nodes as I just explained,
so elements are really just the nodes which are created off of HTML tags which were rendered, not the
text in there.
Now why does this matter?
Because on element nodes, on elements therefore, you have special properties and methods to interact
with the elements, to change their style, to change their content and so on. You also have special properties
on methods and text nodes but you simply don't work with text nodes as often as you will work with elements
because typically you want to add a new HTML element, you want to remove one, you want to change the
style of one, you want to edit it in any other way. For text, you typically just want to change the text
and then you typically just go to the elements that holds the text and change the child content which
is the text of that element, which is why you don't work with text nodes as often. So which exact properties
and methods are available on every element,
so on every rendered HTML tag depends on the kind of element though,
for example on the input where the user can enter content, you have ways of reading that input, on other
elements where users just can't edit the content, you don't have access to that of course and you have
different ways of selecting elements,
as I mentioned we'll learn about different methods that give us access and you can also create and remove
them with the help of Javascript. So that's the difference between nodes and elements, elements are the
important thing for us here,
text nodes are most of the time just created automatically when you set the text content of an
element to a new text content for example
but again it is something we'll come back to.
Let's now try out some of these query methods to get a feeling for how they work.